# Value Generation

> [!CAUTION]
> In 3.0.0, the default value generation strategy has changed from the older SERIAL columns to the newer IDENTITY columns. Read the below carefully if you are migrating an existing database.

> [!NOTE]
> It's recommended that you start by reading the general [Entity Framework Core docs on generated properties](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/ef/core/modeling/generated-properties).

## Serial and identity columns (auto-increment)

### Introduction

Since PostgreSQL 10, the standard way to define auto-incrementing columns is "identity columns". Prior to version 10, "serial columns" were used, which are less SQL-compliant and generally more difficult to manage. For more information on these, [see this blog post](https://blog.2ndquadrant.com/postgresql-10-identity-columns/). Note that since PostgreSQL 10, both support `smallint`, `integer` and `bigint` as their data type.

The Npgsql EF Core provider allows you to choose which of the above you want on a property-by-property basis, or globally on your model. The following "value generation strategies" are available:

* *Identity by default*: an identity column whose values are *by default* generated at the database, but you can still override this behavior by providing values from your application. This will generate the clause `GENERATED BY DEFAULT AS IDENTITY` on your column, and is the default value generation strategy.
* *Identity always*: an identity column whose values are *always* generated at the database - you cannot provide values from your application. This will generate the clause `GENERATED ALWAYS AS IDENTITY` on your column.
* *Serial*: the traditional PostgreSQL serial column. This will create the column with the `serial` datatype. Recommended only if you are using an older PostgreSQL version.
* *Sequence HiLo*: See below

Prior to version 3.0, the Npgsql provider generates "serial" columns for ID columns; starting with version 3.0, it generates "identity by default" instead. In other words, when `ValueGeneratedOnAdd` is specified on a `short`, `int` or `long` property, the Npgsql provider will automatically map it to a serial or identity column. Note that EF Core will automatically recognize key properties by convention (e.g. a property called `Id` in your entity) and will implicitly set them to `ValueGeneratedOnAdd`; a standard model with ID columns should automatically get created with the appropriate column type.

> [!CAUTION]
> Since the default strategy has changed, if you have an existing database with migrations, the the first migration created after upgrading to version 3.0 will alter your tables and convert serial columns to identity ones. This is a sensitive, one-time migration operation that should be done with care, and carefully tested before deployment to production. Changing a value generation is a significant change to an existing database.

You can easily control the value generation strategy for the entire model. For example, to opt out of the change to identity columns, simply place the following in your context's `OnModelCreating()`:

```c#
protected override void OnModelCreating(ModelBuilder modelBuilder)
    => modelBuilder.UseSerialColumns();
```

Note that if you are using PostgreSQL 9.6 or older, identity columns will not work. It is recommended to place the provider in compatibility mode with your specific version - this will also affect the default value generation strategy:

```c#
protected override void OnConfiguring(DbContextOptionsBuilder optionsBuilder)
    => optionsBuilder.UseNpgsql("...", o => o.SetPostgresVersion(9, 6));
```

## Standard sequence-driven columns

While `serial` sets up a sequence for you, you may want to manage sequence creation yourself. This can be useful for cases where you need to control the sequence's increment value (i.e. increment by 2), populate two columns from the same sequence, etc. Adding a sequence to your model is described in [the general EF Core documentation](https://docs.microsoft.com/ef/core/modeling/relational/sequences); once the sequence is specified, you can simply set a column's default value to extract the next value from that sequence. Note that the SQL used to fetch the next value from a sequence differs across databases (see [the PostgreSQL docs](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/static/functions-sequence.html)). Your models' `OnModelCreating` should look like this:

```c#
protected override void OnModelCreating(ModelBuilder modelBuilder)
{
    modelBuilder.HasSequence<int>("OrderNumbers")
                .StartsAt(1000)
                .IncrementsBy(5);

    modelBuilder.Entity<Order>()
                .Property(o => o.OrderNo)
                .HasDefaultValueSql("nextval('\"OrderNumbers\"')");
}
```

## HiLo Autoincrement Generation

One disadvantage of database-generated values is that these values must be read back from the database after a row is inserted. If you're saving multiple related entities, this means you must perform multiple roundtrips as the first entity's generated key must be read before writing the second one. One solution to this problem is HiLo value generation: rather than relying on the database to generate each and every value, the application "allocates" a range of values, which it can then populate directly on new entities without any additional roundtrips. When the range is exhausted, a new range is allocated. In practical terms, this uses a sequence that increments by some large value (100 by default), allowing the application to insert 100 rows autonomously.

To use HiLo, specify `ForNpgsqlUseSequenceHiLo` on a property in your model's `OnModelCreating`:

```c#
protected override void OnModelCreating(ModelBuilder modelBuilder)
    => modelBuilder.Entity<Blog>()
                   .Property(b => b.Id)
                   .ForNpgsqlUseSequenceHiLo();
```

You can also make your model use HiLo everywhere:

```c#
protected override void OnModelCreating(ModelBuilder modelBuilder)
    => modelBuilder.ForNpgsqlUseSequenceHiLo();
```

## Guid/UUID Generation

By default, if you specify `ValueGeneratedOnAdd` on a Guid property, a random Guid value will be generated client-side and sent to the database.

If you prefer to generate values in the database instead, you can do so by specifying `HasDefaultValueSql` on your property. Note that PostgreSQL doesn't include any Guid/UUID generation functions, you must add an extension such as `uuid-ossp` or `pgcrypto`. This can be done by placing the following code in your model's `OnModelCreating`:

```c#
protected override void OnModelCreating(ModelBuilder modelBuilder)
    => modelBuilder.HasPostgresExtension("uuid-ossp")
                   .Entity<Blog>()
                   .Property(e => e.SomeGuidProperty)
                   .HasDefaultValueSql("uuid_generate_v4()");
```

See [the PostgreSQL docs on UUID for more details](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/static/datatype-uuid.html).

## Computed Columns (On Add or Update)

> [!NOTE]
> This feature was introduced in 3.0.0.

The upcoming PostgreSQL 12 is adding support for [stored generated columns](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/12/ddl-generated-columns.html), and Npgsql feature supports that feature as well. The following configuration:

```c#
protected override void OnModelCreating(ModelBuilder modelBuilder)
{
    modelBuilder.Entity<Person>()
      .Property(p => p.DisplayName)
      .HasComputedColumnSql(@"""FirstName"" || ' ' || ""LastName""");
}
```

Will cause the following migration SQL to be generated

```sql
ALTER TABLE ""Person"" ADD ""DisplayName"" text GENERATED ALWAYS AS (""FirstName"" || ' ' || ""LastName"") STORED;
```

Note that this is a *stored* column - it is computed once when the row is updated, and takes space on disk. Virtual computed columns, which are computed on each select, are not yet supported by PostgreSQL.